---
layout: post
title: ORNL Internship&#58; Python 2 and 3
categories: [Research, Reflections]
---

After seeing how well I did on the [ipywe project]({% post_url 2020-04-11-ipywe %}), my mentors from ORNL extended my internship as a part-time internship until the end of the year (with plans to further extend it to the end of Spring semester 2018). When they first set up the extension, they informed me that they had a particular project in mind, but they had to prepare some stuff for it before I could start. So, in the mean time, they assigned me another project, possibly the most tedious I have worked on yet. The project was simple: take the Python code that made up the [Distributed Data Analysis for Neutron Scattering Experiments (DANSE) project](http://danse.us/) and refactor it to allow DANSE to support both Python 2 and Python 3. The project itself was simple and tedious. It mainly consisted of using basic online information (which mostly came from the official Python documentation or Stack Overflow) to identify and update certain problematic sections of code.

However, looking back on this project, it was actually the driving force in the development of a current interest of mine. To understand why, I need to first explain the motivation behind this project. In December 2008, the Python Software Foundation announced the release of Python 3.0, the next major release of the programming language that promissed to fix numerous issues with the earlier 2.x releases. However, instead of flocking to it, most developers shunned the new 3.x releases. The main reason for this was because, in the 3.0 release, the Python Software Foundation decided to break the language's backwards compatibility with earlier 2.x releases. This meant that, if developers wanted to gain the benefits of Python 3.0 and later, they had to rewrite portions of their code to make it compatible with the newer versions of the language. Although it divided the Python community into two halves (those who used Python 3 and those who used Python 2), there weren't any major issues. In fact, due to the divide, the Python Software Foundation decided to create Python 2.7 to serve as a bridge between the earlier Python 2 releases and Python 3. The language, and its community, continued like this for years until 2014, when the Python Software Foundation announced that the final End of Life (EOL) for Python 2 would be December 1, 2020. This meant that, after that date, Python 2 would no longer be maintained and improved. As a result, a large portion of the Python community began working to update their code so that, using Python 2.7, it could support both Python 2 and Python 3. My project during the Fall Semester of 2018 fell into that effort.

When I learned of this motivation for my project, I became curious as to why the Python Software Foundation decided to break the language's backwards compatibility with Python 2 (mainly had to do with issues in the representations of various Python data types, especially text versus raw bytes). The resulting deep-dive into the inner workings and decision making of Python and its Software Foundation caused me to become interested in similar topics in other languages. This continued until, today, I am exteremely interested in the development of software tools and programming languages over time. Additionally, I believe that this interest, combined with other factors, helped lead to my overall interest in software engineering in general. This is important because, today, my interest in software engineering is perhaps the most important factor in the way I go about programming.

As a result, I feel that this Python support project is one of my most intriguing. On the surface, it was nothing more than a tedious, busy-work task that my mentors put together to hold me over until I could start on another major project. However, despite that, it has actually been one of the most personally influential projects I have ever worked on.
